---
title: 13. Investment Strategies
sidebar_position: 13
---

**Congratulations!** You made it all the way through here. We hope that you achieved by this point financial stability and are ready to invest!

Denmark is an expensive country to invest as we've seen in [[6. Taxes]]. Fortunately, there are some methods that you can use to reduce your taxes and other fees while investing to get most out of it. Here is what we recommend you do from here on in the following order.

## 1. Max out _Aktiesparekonto_
_Aktiesparekonto_ is an accessible investing account taxed at only 17%. Hence, we recommend investing only with the _Aktiesparekonto_ in the beginning up to the maximum contribution limit of 135.900 DKK (160.000 DKK starting in 2025). This is the best move you can make early on due to the low taxes this account and provides.

Since **Securities on an _Aktiesparekonto_ are inventory taxed (Dk: Lagerprincippet) anyway**, we can neglect the fact that ETFs are also inventory taxed. While we are at it, we can make most out of it by **picking accumulating ETFs.**

#### Recommended ETFs
These ETFs are excellent choices for low tax strategies like _Aktiesparekonto_.

| ETF name                                               | Ticker | Tracking Index        | ÅOP (Eng: TER) | Fund size (in billion $) | Currency | Gain in 2020 | Gain in 2021 | Gain in 2022<br/>(Corona Year) | Gain in 2023 | Gain YTD | Gain 5Y | Gain in 3M | Gain in 1W |
|:------------------------------------------------------ |:------ |:--------------------- |:-------------- |:------------------------ |:-------- |:------------ |:------------ |:------------------------------ |:------------ |:-------- |:------- |:---------- |:---------- |
| iShares Core S&P 500 UCITS ETF (Acc)                   | SXR8   | S&P 500               | 0,07%          | 85,273                   | USD      | 14,16%       | 29,99%       | -8,48%                         | 19,09%       | 10,39%   | 99,33%  | 2,07%      | -0,63%     |
| iShares Core MSCI World UCITS ETF USD (Acc)            | EUNL   | MSCI World Index      | 0,20%          | 74,301                   | USD      | 12,14%       | 23,48%       | -8,13%                         | 17,15%       | 8,90%    | 78,45%  | 2,14%      | -0,54%     |
| iShares Core MSCI Emerging Markets IMI UCITS ETF (Acc) | IS3N   | MSCI Emerging Markets | 0,18%          | 20,003                   | USD      | 14,44%       | 0,15%        | -9,28%                         | 5,51%        | 2,83%    | 21,55%  | 1,58%      | -3,30%     |
| iShares MSCI ACWI UCITS ETF USD (Acc)                  | IUSQ   | MSCI ACWI             | 0,20%          | 13,442                   | USD      | 11,86%       | 20,21%       | -8,30%                         | 15,73%       | 8,29%    | 69,49%  | 2,16%      | -0,77%     |
| iShares Core MSCI Europe UCITS ETF EUR (Acc)           | EUNK   | MSCI Europe           | 0,12%          | 8,176                    | EUR      | 2,32%        | 17,34%       | -4,27%                         | 13,80%       | 8,17%    | 52,13%  | 5,49%      | 0,03%      |
| Amundi MSCI World V UCITS ETF (Acc)                    | LCUW   | MSCI World Index      | 0,12%          | 5,287                    | USD      | 12,23%       | 23,32%       | -8,34%                         | 17,03%       | 8,85%    | 77,42%  | 2,02%      | -0,63%     |

Source: www.JustETF.com on 05.06.2024

These ETFs are all accumulating, follow any [[10. How to choose your Investment#Low-risk IndexesIof the outlined low-risk indexes]] and have a high liquidity!

> ##### Why mainly "iShares" ETF?
> iShares are ETFs provided by BlackRock, the biggest asset manager in the world, and have a big footprint in Europe. Moreover, many (not all) iShares ETFs are registered in Ireland, where ETFs dividends are taxed at 0%. However, you should not focus solely on iShares ETFs. It's a coincidence that this selection mainly has index-tracking ETFs from iShares.

> ##### EUNL vs LCUW?
> When searching online, most sources recommend EUNL with 0,20% yearly management fee, eventough LCUW only has 0,12%. Why is that?
> EUNL from iShares has been around since 2009 with a substantial fund size of 74 billion USD and is registered in Ireland with a 0% dividend taxation, meaning you'll be entirely taxed in Denmark. 
> Comparetively, LCUW from Amundi exists only since 2019, has a smaller fund size of only 5 billion USD and is registered in Luxembourg with a 15% dividend taxation, meaning you'll be 15% taxed in Luxembourg and the rest of the 27% (or more) in Denmark. 
> EUNL has been popular due to its age and liquidity. However, LCUW might be a better alternative due to it's 0,08% lower yearly management fee.

> ##### Shouldn't EUNL and LCUW have the same yearly gains since both track the same index?
>  Yes, but no. You see, fund managers have the option to mirror the index exactly 1-to-1, known as Full Replication. However, replicating an index can sometimes be expensive. In such cases, fund managers may choose to partially follow the index, known as Optimized Sampling. 
>  EUNL is an Optimized Sampling ETF, while LCUW is a Full Replication ETF. This difference in strategy leads to the minor variation in their gains.
> Neither approach is inherently better; the choice depends on the specific index, market conditions, and the goals of the ETF provider.


#### How to Choose the right ETF for Your _Aktiesparekonto_?
Still too many choices? We got you covered!

From the above recommendations table, _iShares Core S&P 500 UCITS ETF (Acc) (SXR8)_ has outperformed every other ETF and has one of the lowest ÅOP/TER. However, can you rely on historical data to say that the USA will continue to outperform?

Some reliable sources like [Morningstar](https://www.morningstar.com/news/marketwatch/20240513112/international-stocks-are-poised-to-beat-the-sp-500-heres-why) and the [International Monetary Fund (IMF)](https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2024/04/16/world-economic-outlook-april-2024) forecast that Emerging Markets will outperform the USA or World (developed markets index) in the coming years. Here may be some reasons for it:
- Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) and Samsung (South Korea) are leaders in the semiconductor industry, critical for global technology supply chains.
- [India's GDP growth rate was around 7%](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/01/how-india-can-seize-its-moment-to-become-the-world-s-third-largest-economy/), significantly higher than the [USA growth rate of about 2%](https://www.macrotrends.net/global-metrics/countries/USA/united-states/gdp-growth-rate) in 2022.
- [Brazil's index tracker (MSCI Brazil) massively outperformed the S&P 500 in 2022 by 20%](https://ca.style.yahoo.com/finance/news/heres-why-brazil-etfs-breezing-120012825.html).

But these are only forecasts. Anything can happen at any time. Political events, wars, or natural disasters could affect them.

**The _iShares MSCI ACWI UCITS ETF USD (Acc) (IUSQ)_ is the most neutral choice and the one we recommend. The [MSCI ACWI consists of 62% USA-based companies](https://www.msci.com/research-and-insights/visualizing-investment-data/acwi-imi-complete-geographic-breakdown), which are primarily included in the S&P 500, so you're not missing out on the "S&P 500 performance".**

Picking any other ETF is actually an active guess that certain parts of the world market will perform better than others. Regardless of which one you pick, looking only at the historical data, if you had invested 5 years ago, you would have made at least a 30% profit on your investment and not any loss.

## 2. Aldersopsparing
Denmark has six types of pension schemes:
- **ATP**: Short for "Arbejdsmarkedets Tillægspension", this is a mandatory pension supplement for almost all workers in Denmark. You contribute to it via SKAT, and you'll receive it automatically if you live in Denmark and have a NemKonto.
- **Folkepension**: This is the public pension, which includes a basic amount that is the same for everyone and a supplement that varies depending on whether you are married, living with a partner, or single.
- **Kapitalpension**: New "Kapitalpension" accounts cannot be created anymore, but if you already have one, you can choose to receive the entire savings at once or in parts.
- **Livsvarig livrente**: This is a _private_ pension savings plan that you pay into yourself. It provides monthly payments for as long as you live. It's also known as a lifetime pension.
- **Ratepension**: This is the most common pension plan. If you have a workplace pension, this is usually the plan used, where you (and possibly, your employer) contribute a monthly percentage of your salary into it. The savings are paid out in fixed monthly instalments over 10-30 years.
- **Aldersopsparing**: This is the replacement for Kapitalpension. You can choose to receive the entire savings at once or in parts.

The thing with [_Ratepension_ and _Aldersopsparing_ is that](https://skat.dk/borger/aarsopgoerelse-forskudsopgoerelse-og-indkomst/pension-og-efterloen/fradrag-for-indbetalinger-til-pension):
- Contributions to both are tax-deductible, with a limit of 63.100 DKK for _Ratepension_ and 9.100 DKK for _Aldersopsparing_ in 2024 
- _Aldersopsparing_ has a max contribution of 9.100 DKK per year, where this limitation does not exist for _Ratepension_ (but only until 63.100 is tax-deductible)
- Payments from both are invested to keep up with inflation
- Investments are only taxed at 15.3% following the inventory principle (DK: Lagerprincip) taxation

Do you see where we're getting at? This is another way to lower your investment taxes in Denmark. It is the best form of savings for long-term investments, all tough you can't access the money until you retire, which is usually around age 68 in Denmark. **We recommend setting up an _Aldersopsparing_ account with [Nordnet](https://www.nordnet.dk/dk/tjenester/pension/aldersopsparing) and try to contribute the maximum amount each year (up to 9.100 DKK) by investing in any ETF from the [[13. Investment Strategies#Recommended ETFs]], like the  _iShares MSCI ACWI UCITS ETF USD (Acc) (IUSQ)_ and enjoy the tax benefits!**

> **Note**    
> SAXO Bank does not offer _Aldersopsparing_ accounts. Many banks offer _Aldersopsparing_ accounts [[7. Costs of Investing#Costs associated with Investing| but charge custody fees]]. Hence, why we recommend Nordnet in this case

## 3. Månedsopsparing
Got some money left to spare? You must be doing well!

The next step is to sign up for a _Månedsopsparing_ (Eng: Monthly Savings) service with SAXO or Nordnet. This isn’t a new account that you create, but a free service where you choose an amount to be invested each month in one or more ETFs, Danish Investment Funds or Mutual Funds of your choice.

> Not all ETFs or Mutual Funds are available for a _Månedsopsparing_ and Stocks are entirely excluded 

There are two advantages to this:
- You spread your investments periodically taking advantage of the **_Dollar-Cost-Averaging_** strategy
- You don't pay any brokerage fee when investing with a **_Månedsopsparing_**. This is specifically interesting because it nullifies the common belief that "Investing only makes sense with a large amount of money for the investing fees to be comparably minimal."

Now, for the first time, **ETFs are not great choices**. You see, an accumulating ETF is great, but inventory taxes (Dk: Lagerprincippet) can quickly eat up a portion of your profits. That's why we recommend them for low-tax strategies with like _Aktiesparekonto_ and _Aldersopsparing_ which are inventory taxed anyway. _Månedsopsparing_ doesn’t offer tax benefits; it only saves you from paying brokerage fees. Thus, you need to be more careful. 

From now on, your choice determines if your securities are taxed at a minimum of 27% (Aktieindkomst) or 37% (Kapitalindkomst) and whether they are inventory (Lagerprincippet) or realized (Realisationsprincippet) taxed.

That is where **we finally take advantage of the _Danish Investment Funds_! They are taxed as _Aktieindkomst_, and if they pay dividends, they are only taxed when realized. Great!**

#### Danish Investment Funds Picks for Normal Investing Accounts
https://www.nordnet.dk/markedet/investeringsforeninger-liste?sortField=yield_1y&sortOrder=descending&fundType=EQUITY&page=2

| ETF Name                               | Ticker        | Tracking index                                      | ÅOP (Eng: TER) | Dividends (2023)                 | Gain in 2020 | Gain in 2021 | Gain in 2022<br/>(Corona Year) | Gain in 2023 | Gain 5Y |
|:-------------------------------------- |:------------- |:--------------------------------------------------- |:-------------- |:-------------------------------- |:------------ |:------------ |:------------------------------ |:------------ |:------- |
| Danske Invest Global Indeks            | DKIGI         | MSCI World Index                                    | 0,40%          | ≈ 6,4 DKK per share, paid yearly | 6,32%        | 30,87%       | -13,58%                        | 19,85%       | 48,71%  |
| Sparinvest INDEX Emerging Markets      | SPIEMIKL      | MSCI Emerging Markets                               | 0,50%          | ≈ 3,4 DKK per share, paid yearly | 6,09%        | 5,05%        | -12,24%                        | 7,32%        | 12,82%  |
| Sparinvest INDEX Globale Aktier        | SPVIGAKL      | MSCI ACWI Index                                     | 0,50%          | ≈ 3 DKK per share, paid yearly   | 7,25%        | 25,93%       | -13,14%                        | 17,58%       | 49,43%  |
| Danske Invest USA Indeks, klasse DKK d | DKIUSAIKLDKKD | USA Stocks, can be used as an alternative to S&P500 | 0,35%          | ≈ 1,5 DKK per share, paid yearly | -1,64        | 35,84        | -15,22                         | 22,67        | 44,96%  |

Source: www.nordnet.dk & www.morningstar.dk on 19. June 2024

Looking at the above table, the _Danske Inv Global Indeks, kl DKK d (DKIGI)_ and _Sparindex INDEX Globale Aktier KL (SPVIGAKL)_ are great choices since both follow a diversified MSCI index, had great returns and pay good dividends.

Thus, **we would recommend investing a monthly amount into the _Danske Inv Global Indeks, kl DKK d (DKIGI)_ or _Sparindex INDEX Globale Aktier KL (SPVIGAKL)_ Danish Investment Fund with the _Månedsopsparing_ service**.

Both Danish Investment Funds are great alternatives to ETFs outside _Aktiesparekonto_ and _Aldersopsparing_.

#### How to create a _Månedsopsparing_:
1. Sign up for a _Månedsopsparing_ with either SAXO or Nordnet.
2. Choose your ETF(s), Danish Investment Fund(s) or Mutual Fund(s) and the amount to invest.
3. Set up an automatic monthly deposit or a one-off deposit from your regular bank account to your SAXO or Nordnet account, from which the _Månedsopsparing_ will collect the funds.

You can always adjust your investment amount and the composition of your investments.

## 4. Stocks
Finally, it's time to talk about the big money! Are you ready?!

No, you're probably not. We're not trying to gate keep stocks, but very few people can consistently achieve returns higher than those of Funds. This involves constant buying and selling, readjusting, and staying up-to-date with the progress of the company and markets.

This is close a part-time or full-time job, essentially day trading. Some people hope to make a quick profit and become rich with stock trading or believe they can create their own portfolio that will outperform the recommended ETFs and Danish Funds. However, remember: with greater profit comes greater risk, and if things go wrong, you can lose a lot of money, [like this guy](https://www.tvsyd.dk/horsens/han-mister-800000-kroner-i-sas-aktier). Unless you truly believe in the growth of a company, don't invest in stocks directly. The more you invest in individual stocks, the more you're essentially gambling—like walking into a casino and putting everything on red.

> **Time in the market (long-term holding of funds) beats timing the market (day trading)!**