---
title: 7. Costs of Investing
sidebar_position: 7
---

There are some fees tied to trading, some more, other less hidden.

## Ask, bid and spreads
Items traded on an exchange market are, like the name says, traded. Meaning, there is no unlimited supply of anything and for anything to be bought, there must be someone willing to sell it, and vice versa.

When it comes to investing, two key prices come into play:
- **Ask Price**: This is the price at which someone is willing to sell their stock or ETF.
- **Bid Price**: Conversely, the bid price is the price at which someone is willing to buy a stock or ETF

The difference between these two prices is known as the **Spread**. For example, if a stock has a bid price of $5 and an ask price of $5,05, the spread would be $0,05.

For popular and highly traded products like the "Amazon.com Inc." stock, the spread is typically insignificant due to consistent demand and supply. 

However, stocks with low trading volume can exhibit a high spread, potentially inflating the cost and risk of investing. Imagine purchasing a share for $50, only to find you can only immediately sell it for $40 — that's a $10 difference, effectively a loss right after purchase.
Furthermore, consider the challenge of selling something nobody desires. If you're stuck with it, you might have to settle for a lower price just to offload it. 
High spreads mean you're losing more upfront in any deal and indicate a difficulty in finding buyers.

## Costs of Funds

### Management Fee
We had a quick glance at costs involved with Funds and ETF's in "[2. What can you invest in#Understanding Funds](https://github.com/dk-invest-101/DK-Investing-101/blob/main/0.2%20What%20can%20you%20invest%20in.md#understanding-funds)". Both can either be actively managed or passively managed that you have to pay for. These costs are known as **Management Fees (DK: "Forvaltningsomkostninger" or "Administrationsomkostninger")** and are typically charged on a daily basis but expressed as an annual percentage. For example, a 0,5% management fee translates to a daily deduction of 0,5% / 365 days = 0,00137%.

> Management fees encompass various expenses such as legal fees, IT expenses, marketing, and salaries.

Passively managed funds, such as ETFs, generally have lower management fees, sometimes as low as 0,05%. On the other hand, actively managed funds, like mutual funds, typically charge higher fees, usually ranging from 2% to 3%.

For context, research by Morningstar revealed that the average management fee for passively managed funds was approximately [0,37% in 2022](https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/071816/how-are-etf-fees-deducted.asp).

### Exit/Entry Fees
Some Funds charge additional fees when buying or selling funds. These charges are used to cover the fees for buying the underlying stocks. These fees are called _entry fees_ (DK: Indtrædelseomkostninger) or exit fees (DK: Udtrædelsesomkostninger) and only apply to mutual funds and not ETF's.

> **Why don't Entry/Exit fees apply to ETFs?**  
> ETFs are traded on the stock market, which means investors buy and sell ETF shares directly from other investors, not from the fund company. With Mutual Funds, the fund company might individually purchase new underlying stocks.

### Fund costs Metrics: ÅOP & PRIIP
**ÅOP (Årlige Omkostninger i Procent)** is a Danish metric showing the total expenses of owning an ETF over seven years, as a percentage of its assets. These costs cover management fees, administrative costs, and others, allowing easy comparison across different funds. A similar global alternative is the "Total Expense Ratio" (TER), which focuses only on the annual running costs instead of a seven-year period.

**PRIIP (Packaged Retail Investment and Insurance Products)** is an EU-wide regulation introduced in 2022, replacing ÅOP in an attempt to provide retail investors (the little fishes like you and me) with standardized information about retail products like ETFs. This information is presented in a document called **KID (Key Information Document)** on risks, costs, and includes investment simulations for the funds' performance over good and bad years.

## Costs associated with Investing
There are further costs to consider while investing, which the investment platforms (e.g. Banks) impose fees on:
- **Brokerage fee** (DK: Kurtage gebyr): Each time you trade stocks, ETF's, ... you pay a one-time fee to execute the trade. This is called brokerage fees/commission. Brokerage fee largely depends on which exchange the stock is traded on – that is, the country where the stock originates.
- **Custody fee** (DK: Depotgebyr): Some investment platforms or banks charge you a half-yearly or annual fee for storing your investments. These are entirely different fee's from managing the fund. These fees go towards the bank or investment platform.
- **Foreign exchange fee** (DK: Vekselomkostninger/valutavekslingsgebyr): When investing in a product that is not traded in the same currency as your account, then you'll pay an exchange fee on your trade. In 2024, this is 0.25% for most banks and Investment Platforms.

